>> Brian Holt: Hopefully you found
change root pretty straightforward.
Namespaces and cgroups,
we're gonna step up a little bit
in level of difficulty here.
And I'm also gonna be
a bit more surface level,
because there's a lot of depth here.
But we'll start with namespaces.
Namespaces have been around forever.
It's kind of a core concept of how Linux,
in the kernel, is just built,
kind of in general.
>> Brian Holt: But
let's start with an example,
because I think that's gonna be
the easiest way for me to illustrate this.
But the gist here is it's for
security and resource management.
That's what namespaces are all about.
>> Brian Holt: So let's say that you buy a
server and you put it in your basement and
you're gonna start selling
it to customers, right?
You're gonna start running containers or
VMs or
something in your basement as a way
to make some money on the side.
What sort of concerns would you have
about running untrusted code, right?
Because you're gonna have random people
connecting to your servers that you don't
know personally.
They're going to be uploading stuff
that you don't know what it does,
and they're gonna be running it.
What are your concerns
about untrusted code?
So let's make an example.
You have Alice and Bob,
who are both running
e-commerce.services that deal with money.
And let's say just they're generally
good people minding their own business,
they're just interested in
running their businesses.
But then you have Eve, who joins your
server that has other intentions.
She wants to steal the money,
source code, or
just whatever nefarious money-making
scheme that Eve can get up to.
If you give all three of
them unfettered root access,
you're gonna have some problems because
Eve is gonna be able to run over them.
So the first thing you do, obviously, is
you're gonna say, all right, here's your
jailed process, here's your jailed
process, and here's your jailed process.
That solves your stealing files
kind of security vulnerability.
Cool, but is your problem solved yet?
No.
>> Brian Holt: Despite the fact that
Eve can't actually get to the file,
she can actually still see the processes,
right?
So if you go and you run,
I'll just show you right here.
If I run ps aux.
>> Brian Holt: I can see
this bash is running, and
then I can also see the process
observing itself, ps-aux right here.
But if I had a change-rooted environment,
I would be able to see everything running
in that change-rooted environment.
And if I had three of them and
they're all running their own processes,
they can all see each other's processes.
It seems kinda like a problem, right?
Cuz now you can just go in there and
say, well, at the very least,
I can cause some chaos and
she can just start killing processes.
It seems kind of problematic, right?
>> Brian Holt: She can
unmount file systems, and
probably even the most dangerous thing is
she can start hijacking processes, right?
She can start moving processes out of
your subtree and into her subtree.
She can dump memory.
She can do a bunch of stuff like that.
Namespaces allow you to hide
processes from other processes.
So now, I can give you
a change-rooted environment,
but I can give every one of them
their own set of namespace.
So they have their own set of processes,
they get their own numbers,
they get their own everything.
So they can't even just guess
each other's processes' numbers.
They actually are physically
separated systems so
that she can't actually even
just hijack them that way.
This is just part of
what namespaces can do.
But it's probably the most salient
detail in what we're talking about here.
But namespace handle a lot of things.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, so what I described
here is basically just the UTS system,
which is called the UNIX
time-sharing namespace.
And we'll talk a bit more about some
of the other namespaces later, but for
now, let's just focus on that.
So I'm gonna go back
in here into my jailed
process,
>> Brian Holt: By doing that.
Okay, so I'm in my jailed process.
I'm gonna open another tab here.
So you can see, I have two tabs open.
And then I'm gonna run this command here,
docker exec -it docker-host bash.
This is going to allow me to
connect to the same container.
>> Brian Holt: Right,
cuz we called it docker-host.
In fact, I'll even just show you.
>> Brian Holt: You can see I have
docker-host running right here.
It's been running for 23 minutes.
I'm going to say docker exec
docker-host bash, right?
And so now I have another instance of
bash connected to the same container.
So if I say docker ps here, or,
not Docker ps, rather ps aux,
you can see, I can actually see
multiple instances of bash running.
I can see the other
processes running here.
So I'm the admin,
that's probably okay that I can
see the other processes running.
But if you can imagine if I have another
person that comes in here and another
jail process, they can also see each
other's processes, which is a problem.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, and
just to kind of demonstrate that for
you, I'm gonna run this process here.
So this is my jailed process here.
I'm gonna run this.
All this does is this just
runs this command perpetually,
it doesn't really matter what it does.
And now, if I come over here,
God, force of habit, ps aux.
Do that, cuz I don't have tail in here.
Well, I can do it the other way around.
So I can do that here.
>> Brian Holt: And
is this gonna work from here?
No, but if I do here,
you can see here that I can see the tail
running in my other process, right?
So every instance the bash
can see each other.
It would work from within
the jailed process as well,, but
we don't have ps in there, right,
and we don't have tail in there.
So that's why that's not
working at the moment.
But I'll show you that
here in just a second.
>> Brian Holt: So we can actually even
get a little bit more nefarious than
this, right?
So this is still running the process,
right?
>> Brian Holt: And
if I go grab this PID right here, 91,
which is the process ID,
and if I say kill -9 91.
>> Brian Holt: You can see here it was
killed from the other process, right?
This is the danger that
we're kind of talking about,
that if you have multiple people
connect to the same thing, and
they can see each other's process trees,
they can start messing with each other.
Let's introduce some safety
here then with unshare.
>> Brian Holt: Unshare is going to allow
us to be able to separate processes and
their namespaces from each other.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
what I'm gonna do here,
I have a bunch of setup
instructions here for you.
This is gonna install, basically,
a very minimal copy of Debian.
The one,
>> Brian Holt: Warning I'm gonna give
you is that this will install about
150 megabytes and it is not cached.
So if you do it again, it's gonna
do it 150 megabytes again, right?
So every time that you run this command
right here, the debootstrap one,
be aware that you're
installing 150 megs of stuff.
Okay, so
we're gonna run that apt-get update.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, that worked.
apt-get install deboostrap
-y,
>> Brian Holt: I didn't spell that right,
debootstrap.
>> Brian Holt: Debootstrap is just a tool
to install minimal copy of Debian,
that's what it does.
Okay, I'm gonna say
debootstrap -- variant=minbase.
If you don't do this, you'll install
a full copy, which is even bigger.
We're gonna do jammy,
and we're gonna put it
into /better-root instead of my new root.
Okay, so I'm gonna get that running.
It'll take, I'll say, a couple minutes,
but it takes probably 90 seconds,
I'm gonna guess.
So while that's running,
we'll talk about what we're gonna do here.
unshare, right, so this is basically,
I'm gonna create a new process.
And inside that process, I want you
to create new namespaces for uts,
that's what we were just talking about,
UNIX time-sharing, network,
process IDs, process forkings,
user space, all that kinda stuff.
And then It inside of that unshared
environment, we also want to change root
into my better-root, which is going to
be basically a new copy of Linux for us.
And then I want you to
run bash inside of it.
And then these three commands here
are basically just saying, hey, Linux,
mount this for me, which is basically
saying, there's a system created for you,
please use it for me.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so now,
if you look inside of better-root,
you'll see that it looks almost
identical to what's out here,
because we just created a new
copy of Linux essentially.
And then I'm going to run this.
>> Brian Holt: And you can see here,
it looks really similar, right?
And it's because, now, we're basically in
a full copy of Linux inside of our copy of
Linux, which is now inside of macOS for
me, right?
We're going down,
this tunnel's all the way down, okay?
And we're gonna mount
all of these systems.
So just copy and paste all of these.
Let's see, sorry,
>> Brian Holt: That one,
that one, and that one.
>> Brian Holt: All right, so now we
are in a fully unshared environment.
So let's go ahead and run our little
process here again, this tail.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna run this
from the host operating system.
So again, my first tab here up to the top,
this is inside of my unshared environment.
And the second one, remember,
is not in the unshared environment.
It's in the host computer.
So if I run this, okay,
so this is now running.
And I say ps aux, notice that this
can't see above itself, right?
It can't see what the parent is doing.
It's now wholly unaware
of both its processes and
its file system of what's above it.
>> Brian Holt: I don't know,
I think that's pretty impressive.
I think it's pretty cool, right?
We've now fully jailed and
namespaced this off, so
that no matter who's creating
apps on your server,
no matter how nefarious Eve is,
she can't see the processes,
she can't see the files, she can't
hijack processes, she can't kill stuff.
This all has become impossible to her
because we've kind of sectioned off,
or one could say, contained,
right, this process.
Pretty cool, right?
So, this is the PID right here, 8269.
If I try and come in here and say,
kill -9, that PID is gonna be like,
I don't know what that is, right?
Because this one doesn't have the process
ID of 8269, only this one does.
>> Brian Holt: Pretty sure.
>> Brian Holt: Oop,
how many times am I gonna do that today?
Yeah, 8269 right there.
So I could do it from here, right, cuz
this is not an unshared environment, but
this one can't do it.
It can't see it because
it's now been contained.
This first tab that I have up here,
it's inside of
basically the handcrafted container,
right?
So you can see this command right here,
this unshare one.
It's been change rooted, right?
So that's why it can't see any
of the file system above it.
And this unshare part of it has
contained all of its namespaces, right?
So you can see we've isolated its mount,
UTS, IPC,
all of those, so
that this one is now isolated, and
it wouldn't be able to see other
contained processes on its host,
whereas this one can,
cuz this is the host computer, right?
The host can see into what
the children processes are, right?
When I did this for the first time, it was
what I got really excited to teach this
course, it's like, my God, this is so.
It's understandable,
cuz it's very tangible, right?
You can actually kinda watch
all of this stuff happen,
which I think is really cool.